---
layout: post
title:      "Time for Change"
date:       2019-12-05 05:09:05 +0000
permalink:  time_for_change
---

A bit of background to start: I am and have been a practicing structural engineer over the past 9 years. Before that, I spent 4 years in college getting a Bachelor's and Master's in Civil and Structural Engineering. And before that, I spent the majority of my elementary school, middle school, and high school years devoted to the fields of math and science (ie. nerd). I guess it is not really surprising then that my career path has followed a trajectory that has landed me in the exact position I'm in now. What is surprising, however, is that although I seem to have been destined to be a structural engineer, I do not enjoy it nearly as much as my peers. Don't get me wrong, I have been pretty satisfied with my career for the majority of the past decade. 

However, I've always felt there was something missing. 

Now, I've always loved tinkering with technology. In fact, one of my earliest memories involves fixing the circuit board of a simplistic police car-chasing electronic game I had received as a hand-me-down when I was about 6 or 7 years old. It wasn't anything complicated - just a brightly lit spinning drum, covered with the graphics of a winding road littered with obstacles, that shifted left and right according to the rotation of the steering wheel to give the impression that you were driving the cop car sticker plastered in the middle of the screen - and it was likely due more to luck than anything else that I was able to get it running again. However, that experience, along with countless others, fueled my fascination with how electronics work and what constitutes the logic that powers them. This interest grew substantially after I encountered my very first personal computer, a Windows 98 dream machine. As much as I enjoyed playing video games on that desktop (Daytona USA and Age of Empires come to mind), I was even more thrilled by how all other the software, both pre-loaded and user-installed, could interact so effortlessly. 

It was around that time that I started to dabble with the inner-workings of software. It started as a hobby of tinkering around with simple MS-DOS commands and slowly grew into a couple of semesters of computer programming courses in high school and college to learn the basics of C++ and Java. Although I stopped officially pursuing software programming after my Sophomore year to focus solely on structural engineering, I never stopped tinkering with any interesting software I came across. And thanks to the ubiquity of smartphones and the easy availability of cheap but powerful and developer-friendly computers, such as the Raspberry Pi, there's never been a shortage of apps and software for me to discover and play around with. I can honestly say that the time I've spent modifying and tweaking the software on my phones, PCs, game consoles, mp3 players, and even cars to gain root access or admin rights and to perform something completely new and imaginative (usually through the hard work and creativity of an independent developer) has given me more joy than any project I've designed and helped build as a structural engineer.

I've always had this nagging feeling that I should go back to school to fully learn software development but it just never seemed to be an actual viable option, especially after having traversed and slogged through an almost decade-long path into a career that initially seemed to have had such a perfect fit with my skill set. But after years of self-reflection and experience, I've finally made the decision to pursue a career doing something I love, that is both technical and creative. It is the path that I should have taken a long time ago. It is time for change.
