---
layout: post
title:      "Pandemic, Program Pause and Portfolio Project #3"
date:       2021-05-10 06:21:42 +0000
permalink:  pandemic_program_pause_and_portfolio_project_3
---


Continuity and Focus.

It's no doubt that the past year has been an incredibly challenging time for all of us. Everything that we're used to has changed due to the pandemic and there isn't a single person who hasn't been impacted by it. Personally, I consider myself very lucky in that not only have I been able to keep my job, unlike many others, but the transition to remote working has actually provided me the benefits of being able to spend more precious time with my new and growing family. Prior to the pandemic, time with my wife and toddler was always a limited luxury, and it was made even more scarce due to my and my partner's different schedules. But thankfully, the nature of remote working has allowed me to have a more dynamic and fluid routine as the majority of my job can now be completed at home.

However, there is a flip side to that coin. More time spent with my family inevitably means longer working hours as my time throughout the regular 9-to-5 workday (which already frequently ran between 9-to-8 on most days even before the pandemic) is no longer exclusive to me and my work. It is peppered with time spent playing with my toddler (as most daycares remain closed or have very limited capacities with no spots for new enrollments) to help him develop valuable social and learning skills, preparing meals at home for my family instead of buying a quick meal to eat on my desk at work, and general day-to-day housekeeping and maintenance "distractions" that were typically pushed off till the weekend as most of my days were spent in workspaces that were cleaned and maintained by others. All of these extras have naturally extended my time spent logged in remotely to the office as the struggles of a work-life balance must now be juggled completely within the confines of our home, with no clear delineation or boundaries between work and family. And let's be honest, the actual sum of time necessary to complete a task sporadically equates to a lot more hours as compared to time spent on the same task when it is done with uninterrupted focus. 

This lack of focus has had quite a negative impact on my software engineering learning experience. Finding the time to do lessons and projects, which was already a challenge in the months before COVID, has now led to frequent bouts of sleepless nights, not unlike during my collegiate years, as work days sometime seemingly just have no end. However, in the decade since I've graduated, my stamina and ability to pull all-nighters have dropped significantly and resorting to this approach no longer yields the same efficacy that I once managed. The effects of sleep deprivation now feels compounded with each lost minute and any gains that I am able to reap from this trade are quickly negated by the decrease in productivity in the days following nights of lost sleep, which invariably leads to more lost sleep as I try to catch up on both work and lessons. 

To help refocus and to reset my schedule and energy, I then decided to take advantage of the Program Pause option, which allows any student to take a month-long break from the course without penalty. For the sake of transparency, those weren't the only reasons why I decided to briefly pause my education -- as another side effect of COVID, my family had to accelerate our search for a new home away from the crowds and confines of NYC, which at the time had become the epicenter of the pandemic. After losing out on countless houses to the thousands of other people looking to leave the city, we were finally able to secure a property to move into. As delighted as I was to have found a new home for our family, it was unfortunately another priority that required a significant amount of time, attention and resources that I just didn't have. And so I was ultimately forced to opt into the aforementioned Program Pause to try and extend my coursework schedule. However, moving into our new home proved to be a lot more time-consuming and I was unable to return to Flatiron for more than 4 months.

This break in continuity has probably been the most difficult challenge I've encountered so far in my coding journey. And it likely was not helped by the fact that this Rails Project was the outstanding item that I was unable to complete prior to the Program Pause. Jumping back into the middle of this coursework and project task has to be one of the most ill-timed actions I could have taken. In the few months where I did not take up any software engineering exercises, libraries, gems, codebases, and even the virtual environments where they are run have changed so dramatically that even a thorough review of the completed lessons and my own personal notes had to be supplemented with tons of additional third party information just to get my application up and running. Though it has been a somewhat frustrating experience, it is definitely an invaluable lesson as it pointedly highlights just how important it is to keep up-to-date with the constantly evolving technologies of software development, and that to be successful in coding, one really needs to keep practicing and using it. Just one more proof for the old adage, "use it or lose it."
